---
layout: post
title:  "JavaScript 101 — Create your online resume that will land your dream job - Part 2"
author: "Nabil"
---
_This blog post is included in a series where we are going to build a framework in JavaScript that will help us create our own resume engine. Find the first article of the series here._

Let’s continue building our awesome resume that we will be able to manage very easily. You will be able to change an experience on your resume, add a new one etc without touching the html & css, once it is setup! We will have the ability to change the design very easily to give our website a new fresh look. As easy as changing your resume on linkedIn, but on your own website www.lastnamefirstname.com :D.

It is very important to understand how we are going to proceed. We can sum it up in one line (which is not from me but I love):

“Make it work, then make it right, then make it fast.”

The idea behind the application is the following: we will create a model where al the raw data will live, create an “id” on each HTML tag that renders the data. Then, we will have to bind the view element to the right data in the model, thanks to the previously added “id”. We will build the model and render it to the user at the right place thanks to data bindings.

Let’s do it. As we did in the previous post, the first step is to pick the correct design, with the HTML and CSS so we don’t bother writing it. DONE :)

Now, let’s try to make our framework work from end to end for one simple attribute. We give the name parameter an id, I create a “name” attribute in my model and try to render the model value in the view.

I add a « name » id

```html
<!-- index.html -->
<h1 class=”name” id=”name” class=”editable”>Alan Doe</h1>
```

```javascript
//=== view.js
var data = {
  "name": "nabil bouabdallah"
};
```
And I want the result to be :

```html
<h1 class=”name” id=”name”>nabil bouabdallah</h1>
```

In order to do that, we have to grab the correct value from the model and replace what is inside the DOM element with id « name ». Alright, let’s do it. We grab the DOM element that has the Id « name » and we assign it the correct value.

```javascript
//===view.js
var model = {
  "name" : "nabil bouabdallah"
}

var elem = document.getElementbyId("name") ;

elem.innerHTML = model["name"]
```

OK, it works for now. It will work as long as I have a flat data structure.

I would like at the end of the project to manage my resume in a very convenient to have a structure like this one :

```javascript
var project1 = {
  "name" : "Velocity",
  "begin_date" : "23/05/2012",
  "end_date" : "23/07/2012",
  "description" : "qdsjmfqmejnaerzngamerzjvna"
}

var project2 = {
  "name" : "DevStudio",
  "begin_date" : "23/05/2012",
  "end_date" : "23/07/2012",
  "description" : "qdsjmfqmejnaerzngamerzjvna"
}

var resume = {
  "name" : "nabil bouabdallah",
  "personal projects" : [
    project1,
    project2
  ]
```

This data structure named “resume” cater for professional experiences and personal projects which are collections. In this example, I have two projects as objects which have the same attributes stored in an array.

Let’s continue with this more intuitive data structure. We know how to change simple UI elements by grabing them thanks to their ID and setting their ‘innerHTML’ property.

In the next blog post we will focus on getting collections from the model and display them in the view.

Follow up here.
