---
layout: post
title:  "Why Git and GitHub?"
author: "Nabil"
categories: DevOps
---

# Introduction
A lot of tutorials already exist about GIT and version control but I am deeply convinced that this can bring a new perspective on understanding how this amazing piece of software actually works and how to practically use it. A lot of the tutorials teach you how to use it with copy/paste type of command. It is enough as long as it works. However, when you have a small problem on your version control - and it happens often - you don't know how to fix it if you don't actually understand how does it work. We will dive into the internals of the system just as deep as necessary in order to be able to fix most common problems in version control.

# What is a Version Control System (VCS)?
Git is a version control system. Let's disect "version-control-system".
  * **version**: You already know what is a software version. When you are asked to update your windows operating system, when you update any application on the play store in Android or on the App Store in iOS. A version is just a tag on one state of the software. So when we change the code to add a feature or to fix a bug for example, we increment the version. Usually, a release comes with a Changelog. It's a list of all the changes we made to the codebase from the previous version to the current one you downloaded. __METTRE UNE IMAGE D'UN CHANGELOG__. This is the first and easiest type of version to understand: __the release__. But the concept of version is more general. As a software developer, I split my feature that I want to release into small chunks. Because a feature can take weeks to develop and release, I will take snapshots of my code at regular interval when the code is in a workable state so that **I don't loose everything I've done so far if I screw up** (you might not understand what it means but sometimes, as a developer I can be messy when developing and I am not able to understand my code - thank you `git stash`). The other benefit is to be able to It's easier to understand the changes for someone external. For example, when I develop an authentication feature in my application, I will take a snapshot, when I developed enough for users to be able to register, then I will take a snapshot when I added the sign in feature. These snapshots, which only developers can see, are called versions as well. It might seem to you at this point that we have two types of versions, one which only developers can see and one which is released to the world on the app store. The fact is that all the snapshots are intermediate snapshots but the release snapshot is a particular type of intermediate snapshot that I apply a tag on to say "The user can now see this version".

  * **control**: Why do we need to control versions? How do we control versions? We need to control snapshots and manipulate them because we, as developers have power and we are wizzards! You will actually see that it's the opposite :D. Developing is an intellectual process, you write code, you erase, you think about the best design for your application and at some point you have a new idea that you implement and you can easily be in the position where you don't understand your own code. It shouldn't happen as you should think through your code before implementing but it does happen as reality comes back and hits you in the face. It happens, even to the best! Being able to control versions at this stage is crucialin order to get back to your previous saved snapshot. That's one use case. The second use case would be in order to revert a snapshot which as been saved in the version control system. For example, the requirements have been lost in translation and you implemented a feature in a snapshot but it's not what your client asked for. Now you need to change the code backwards. Having a version control system enables you to make the opposite changes of a snapshot in one command: "VCS, please revert this snapshot and do as if nothing happened.". There are many other use cases that we will cover in the next parts of this tutorial.

  * **system**: It's a software with a lot of tools which is at the heart of the developers' workflow.

# Why bother using a VCS?
The first question that arise is "Why bother?". Many reasons can be invoqued in favor of using a VCS - git is one of them.
The first argument would be **communication**. Whether it be within an organization or on the web with strangers, software is built by people who need to communicate with each others. When working on a project, people join their efforts to reach their goal. The process is the following: we split the work in different parts: you build the feature A, I build the feature B. Then what happens is that I review what you did and we can discuss it and you can make changes. For example, one of the most widely known software in the world - the Linux Kernel - is developed by people around the world who communicate via e-mail. Each developer has its expertise and they join their skills in order to achieve the beautiful piece of software known as the Linux Kernel. But in order to achieve this, they need to communicate on technical challenges in an efficient and precise way, which they cannot do via e-mail. If I want to justify why I am making this change on the snapshot, how does it work by e-mail? This is why on each VCS, when creating the snapshot, we add to it some text explaining why is the change happening. This enables our colleagues to ha a reason for a change alongside the change. `git diff` is an important feature in Git which helps with communication: it enables a user to see the exact change between two snapshots and review them before sending the patch to production.
The second argument would be **tracability**. Having different snapshots, with a text explaining why on each one of them and the author of the change enables us developers to understand the evolution of a sotware over time.
The third argument is **coming back in time**. It enables us to revert changes if we make a regression by breaking an existing feature without noticing. Or when you break the code during a refactor.

# What is GitHub?
GitHub is a company and a product. It is the number one platform in open source to host projets. GitHub is the home of Open Source. When I was working for Bloomberg, I heavily used GitHub (this is where I learnt how to properly use it). It helps a lot for collaboration and we will see why in the next section. 

GitHub is not Git. GitHub is a remote server to host Git repositories but it's different than Git. GitHub is not a VCS, it is a web platform to collaborate between developers. GitHub is not opensource, it is a commercial product, whereas Git is opensource.

# Why use GitHub?
As I said in the previous paragraph, GitHub is a product that enhance collaboration and helps developers be more efficient at what they do. Let's see in this paragraph which features of GitHub enables it to achieve its goal.

The first feature and the most used one is the **pull request**. Pull request is a way to visually display a difference between two versions of the code and discuss on the change in the browser. It is mostly used for code reviews: it is a very common practice to not push code to production until at least someone else in the team signs off on it. So let's be very practical and explain this with an example **TAKE SCREENSHOT FROM GITHUB TO ILLUSTRATE**. You and me are developers, we are building the next real estate mega applciation that will make us rich and happy in life. One of the first feature we need to develop is the authentication feature for our users to register and use our product. So I make all the necessary changes to the code and make several versions along the way and when I am done with it, I open a pull request and send you the link in order to review it for me. This way, you will see the content of the PR which will be a diff like so **TAKE SCREENSHOT FROM GITHUB TO ILLUSTRATE** and you will be able to make a line by line comment in order to ask question, make comments or request changes. We will communicate on the PR, I will make changes, discuss some of your point of views I disagree with by replying to the comment on my PR and then we will come to a consensus together. At that point, we will be able to merge the code into the main line of code that we periodically send to production.
